**Media Studies 200: An Introduction to Media Studies**        
Fall 2023 at the University of Victoria  
[lək̓ʷəŋən](https://www.songheesnation.ca/community/l-k-ng-n-traditional-territory) and [<u>W</u>SÁNEĆ](https://wsanec.com/) territories      
Taught by [Jentery Sayers](https://jntry.work/) (he / him) 

# Glossary of Media Studies Terms

This glossary is intended as a reference for students in Media Studies 200. Let me know if you'd like me to clarify or correct any of these definitions, especially if you encounter a mistake or typo. Please also inform me if a key term from a given week isn't in the glossary.

You can consult [my notes](https://jentery.github.io/mdia200/notes.html) for each week as well. 

## Week 1 (Sept. 7): Media Are Material Agents

* *analog*: a means of reproduction involving the use of continuously variable (rather than discrete) changes in physical properties; print and cassettes are examples of analog reproduction.  
* *audio*: a material agent for transforming sound into records or files by mechanical, electrical, digital, and/or analog means; such records include wax cylinders, magnetic tape, cassettes, vinyl records, and compact discs; such files include WAVs, MP3s, and M4As; they are reproduced through technologies such as speakers, computers (including laptops and smart phones), software (like Audacity, Ableton, Logic, and Audition), televisions, and computer monitors. 
* *digital*: a means of reproduction involving data represented, transmitted, and translated as a series of binary digits or "bits" (1s and 0s); not all computers are digital, but most of them are. 
* *digital preservation*: "combines policies, strategies and actions to ensure access to reformatted and born digital content regardless of the challenges of media failure and technological change. The goal of digital preservation is the accurate rendering of authenticated content over time." (see the [Association for Library Collections and Technical Services](https://www.ala.org/alcts/resources/preserv/defdigpres0408#:~:text=Digital%20preservation%20combines%20policies%2C%20strategies%20and%20actions%20to%20ensure%20access,of%20authenticated%20content%20over%20time.))
* *electrical*: a means of reproduction involving electricity, transforming the energy of electrical current into another form of energy, such as light or heat; manual or "hand-cranked" turntables don't require electricity, for example; neither do pinhole cameras or  all-mechanical cameras
* *elemental media*: material agents, such as earth, water, air, and fire, for transforming "this" into "that" 
* *format*: a way in which media are arranged or designed, usually for circulation via the means of communication (like broadcasting, publishing, and the internet)
* *image*: a material agent for transforming light or graphics into pictures or files by mechanical, electrical, digital, and/or analog means; such pictures include paintings, drawings, photographs, cartoons, and graphs; such files include PNGs, JPGs, TIFFs, and PDFs; they are reproduced through technologies such as cameras, projectors, computers (including laptops and smart phones), software (like Photoshop, Canva, GIMP, and PowerPoint), televisions, and computer monitors. 
* *mechanical*: a means of reproduction involving moving gears, motors, and other moving physical parts to transform mechanical energy into another form; early phonography mechanically reproduced sound, for instance, by converting mechanical energy into acoustical energy 
* *media*: material agents for transforming "this" into "that" by mechanical, electrical, digital, and/or analog means.  
* *media, the*: the means of mass communication, like broadcasting, publishing, and the internet
* *multimodal*: inviting more than one mode of communication or sensation to combine activities such as hearing, listening, seeing, looking, watching, reading, touching, and playing; in "All Writing Is Multimodal," Cheryl Ball and Colin Charlton write, "[a]ny combination of modes makes a multimodal text, and all texts&#8212;every piece of communication a human composes&#8212;use more than one mode. Thus, all writing is multimodal" (42). 
* *text*: a material agent for transforming marks (such as lines) into alphanumeric characters or files by mechanical, electrical, digital, and/or analog means; such characters may be analog (print) or digital; such files include DOCX, RTF, TXT, and ODT; they are reproduced through technologies such as keyboards, projectors, computers (including laptops and smart phones), software (like word processors, text editors, Photoshop, and PowerPoint), televisions, and computer monitors. 
* *transduction*: the action or process of converting something, especially energy or a message, into another form or format; in *The Audible Past*, Jonathan Sterne writes, "modern technologies of sound reproduction use devices called *transducers*, which turn sound into something else and that something else back into sound. All sound-reproduction technologies work through the use of transducers. Telephones turn your voice into electricity, sending it down a phone line and turning it back into sound at the other end. Radio works on a similar principle but uses waves instead of wires. The diaphragm and stylus of a cylinder phonograph change sound through a process of inscription in tinfoil, wax, or any number of other surfaces. On playback, the stylus and diaphragm transduce the inscriptions back into sounds. Digital sound-reproduction technologies all use transducers; they simply add another level of transformation, converting electric current into a series of zeros and ones (and back again)" (22).
* *video*: a material agent for transforming moving images with or without audio and text into records or files by mechanical, electrical, digital, and/or analog means; such records include VHS, compact discs, and DVDs; such files include FLV, GIF, MOV, and MP4; they are reproduced through technologies such as projectors, computers (including laptops and smart phones), software (like Premiere, Final Cut, iMovie, and Flash), televisions, and computer monitors; see Audrey Amidon at [*The Unwritten Record*](https://unwritten-record.blogs.archives.gov/2013/06/25/film-preservation-101-whats-the-difference-between-a-film-and-a-video/) for more on the physical differences between video and film. 

## Week 2 (Sept. 11 and 14): Media and Interpersonal Communication

* *affordance theory*: "[t]he affordances of the environment are waht it *offers* the animal, what it *provides* or *furnishes*, either for good or ill. The verb to *afford* is found in the dictionary, the noun *affordance* is not. I have made it up. I mean by it something that refers to both the environment and the animal in a way that no existing term does. It implies the complementarity of the animal and the environment" ([J.J. Gibson 1979](https://monoskop.org/images/c/c6/Gibson_James_J_1977_1979_The_Theory_of_Affordances.pdf)).
* *dramaturgy*: "[a] sociological perspective on identity that employs a theatrical metaphor to explore issues of identity formation, reformation and performance, and as such, assumes a place, a moment, and an audience to whom the identity is being presented" ([*Media Studies 101*](https://opentextbc.ca/mediastudies101/back-matter/glossary/)); "[a] key element of dramaturgy is the concept of the front- and backstage. In face-to-face interactions, the front- and backstage are two related but separate areas, where the front is the space in which the performance of self takes place, and the back is where that performance is prepared" ([*Media Studies 101*](https://opentextbc.ca/mediastudies101/chapter/dramaturgy/)).
* *impressions management*: "the overt and the unconscious strategies we, as social individuals, deploy to try and influence how others perceive us" ([*Media Studies 101*](https://opentextbc.ca/mediastudies101/back-matter/glossary/)); "[b]y successfully managing impressions, an individual not only receives positive reaction from their peers or social group, and thus peer esteem, but it also allows for a consistent presentation of self – that is, an individual creates and maintains a consistent story of who 'they' are – the story of 'Kate the friend' or 'Tama the student'" ([*Media Studies 101*](https://opentextbc.ca/mediastudies101/chapter/impressions-management/)).
* *intersectionality*: "the study of overlapping or intersecting social identities and related systems of oppression, domination, or discrimination. The theory suggests that—and seeks to examine how—various biological, social and cultural categories such as gender, race, class, ability, sexual orientation, religion, caste, age, nationality and other sectarian axes of identity interact on multiple and often simultaneous levels" ([Syracuse University Libraries 2023](https://researchguides.library.syr.edu/fys101)); Kimberlé Crenshaw coined the term in 1989 in ["Demarginalizing the Intersection of Race and Sex."](https://philpapers.org/archive/CREDTI.pdf)
* *looking-glass self*: "[t]he looking-glass-model considers the self as constantly reworking itself through a three-step process of imagining how we appear to others, how others judge that appearance, and then developing the self in light of that (hypothetical) judgement" ([*Media Studies 101*](https://opentextbc.ca/mediastudies101/back-matter/glossary/)); "[t]he looking-glass-self is particularly interesting to think about in terms of mediated interactions, whether that be a letter, a talk-show, or a Reddit thread. Because mediated communication involves distance, the individual users become more or less isolated depending on the form of mediation, and the social relationship of interaction becomes stripped of some or many of the subconscious and non-verbal cues with which we often rely upon to moderate our reactions. Particularly in two-way, mediated exchanges, such as phone, text or chat, users often have to imagine the 'reflection' they are having on another’s mind" ([*Media Studies 101*](https://opentextbc.ca/mediastudies101/chapter/looking-glass-self/)).
* *parallel play*: "[a] form of play during which two children engage in similar play activities in proximity to each other without sharing thoughts, play goals, or engaging in play together" (Michael O. Brigano in the [*Encyclopedia of Child Behavior and Development*](https://link.springer.com/referenceworkentry/10.1007/978-0-387-79061-9_2073)). 
* *rhetoric*: "any communication used to modify the perspectives of others" (the [Purdue OWL](https://owl.purdue.edu/owl/general_writing/academic_writing/rhetorical_situation/index.html)); "primarily an awareness of the language choices we make" (["Purdue OWL: Introduction to Rhetoric"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mIESu4yXco4))
* *symbolic interactionism*: "the concern with the construction of identity within a social context, how an identity is presented and re-presented within a given social or communicative situation" ([*Media Studies 101*](https://opentextbc.ca/mediastudies101/back-matter/glossary/)).
